---
date: 2021-10-07
title: naughtty 1.0.0
tags:
  - python
---

In an upcoming project, I'll need a Python script to run command line applications and capture their output.

I know what you're thinking. `subprocess`, right? Capture `stdout`?

Let's try it out!

<!--more-->

## `subprocess` example

```python
from subprocess import run

result = run(["pipenv", "--help"], capture_output=True)
print(result.stdout.decode("UTF-8"))
```

```text
Usage: pipenv [OPTIONS] COMMAND [ARGS]...
```

…but wait! If I run `pipenv --help` directly in a terminal then the word `pipenv` is heavy. But I run `pipenv --help` via `subprocess` then all the formatting is lost.

This isn't a fault in `subprocess`, and I'm not being deliberately cruel towards `pipenv`. It's just a handy example. Many command line applications intentionally emit plain text if they detect that they're running in a non-interactive shell.

_If I'm non-interactive,_ the logic goes, _then there's no human present. And if there's no human present then maybe a regular expression is listening, so I'll filter my output for machine readability._

We can reproduce this outside of Python by redirecting `pipenv --help` to a file:

```bash
pipenv --help > help.txt
```

If you want to capture an application's output as if a human is present, you might need to trick it into believing it's running interactively. You can do this with a **pseudo terminal**, which `naughtty` will happily help you with.

## `naughtty` command line example

After installing `naughtty` with `pip install naughtty`, we can run the same example as above, but through `naughtty`:

```bash
naughtty pipenv --help > help.txt
```

Now, if you take a look at `help.txt`, you'll see the ANSI escape codes that describe the text styles.

## `naughtty` Python example

To grab an application's output in a Python script, import `NaughTTY`, initialise with the application arguments, then `execute()`:

```python
from naughtty import NaughTTY

ntty = NaughTTY(["pipenv", "--help"])
ntty.execute()
print(ntty.output)
```

## 1.0.0

`naughtty` has many more settings I won't cover here because the documentation at [naughtty.readthedocs.io](https://naughtty.readthedocs.io) goes into _all_ the detail.

And the code is available at [github.com/cariad/naughtty](https://github.com/cariad/naughtty) under the MIT licence.

Have fun!
