---
date: 2021-11-22
title: Cline 1.0.0
tags:
  - python
---

Over the last month or so, I've released a ton of command line Python applications: [Ansiscape](/tags/ansiscape/), [NaughTTY](/tags/naughtty/), [thtml](/tags/thtml/), [dinject](/tags/dinject/), [Differently](/tags/differently/), [StackDiff](/tags/stackdiff/), [StackWhy](/tags/stackwhy/) at least, with more on the way.

And every time, I developed an ever-so-slightly different strategy for reading command line arguments and deciding how to operate on them.

And honestly, it's just tiring now.

I figured it was worth reserving some time to build _one_ good single way of reacting to command line arguments. Some strategy that's quick and simple to use. Some framework that supports testing with great coverage.

And so, here's Cline!

<!--more-->

## Tasks

At the heart of Cline are **tasks**. A task is a single, specific type of work that an application can perform. Each task has two responsibilities:

1. Try to translate the command line arguments into strongly-typed task arguments.
1. Operate on those strongly-typed arguments.

This separation of concerns makes the code easy to comprehend and test. Any tests of task functionality can focus on passing strongly-typed arguments and forget about needing to test an infinite variety of user-entered arguments. Likewise, any tests of the argument comprehension can focus on what the values _mean_ and not what they _do_.

How about a quick example?

## Example

Here's some code for a command line application that either sums or subtracts two numbers, depending on whether the `--sum` or `--sub` flag is passed.

First, here's the `Cli` entry point and orchestration class:

```python
from cline import ArgumentParserCli, CommandLineArguments
import example.tasks

class Cli(ArgumentParserCli):
    def make_parser(self) -> ArgumentParser:
        parser = ArgumentParser()
        parser.add_argument(
            "a",
            help="first number",
            nargs="?",
        )

        parser.add_argument(
            "b",
            help="second number",
            nargs="?",
        )

        parser.add_argument(
            "--sub",
            help="subtract",
            action="store_true",
        )

        parser.add_argument(
            "--sum",
            help="sums",
            action="store_true",
        )

        return parser

    def register_tasks(self) -> RegisteredTasks:
        return [
            example.tasks.SumTask,
            example.tasks.SubtractTask,
        ]
```

This `Cli` class extends Cline's `ArgumentParserCli`. This adds support for Python's baked-in `argparse.ArgumentParser` argument parser, which is created and returned by the `make_parser()` function.

Note that the two number arguments are named `a` and `b`. Also note that there are two flags ostensibly named `--sub` and `--sum`, but `ArgumentParser` presents them as `sub` and `sum`. We'll refer to these in the tasks.

Speaking of tasks, the class has a `register_tasks()` method that returns two classes; `SumTask` and `SubtractTask`. These are the two tasks that our application can perform.

`SumTask` is simply this:

```python
from cline import CommandLineArguments, Task
from dataclasses import dataclass


@dataclass
class IntegerArgs:
    a: int
    b: int


class SumTask(Task[IntegerArgs]):
    @classmethod
    def make_args(
        cls,
        args: CommandLineArguments,
    ) -> IntegerArgs:
        args.assert_true("sum")
        return IntegerArgs(
            a=args.get_integer("a"),
            b=args.get_integer("b"),
        )

    def invoke(self) -> int:
        result = self.args.a + self.args.b
        self.out.write(f"{result}\n")
        return 0
```

Note the separation of concerns. First, `make_args()` reads the parsed command line arguments via a `CommandLineArguments` instance and returns a strongly-typed `IntegerArgs` instance.

`CommandLineArguments` provides functions like `assert_true()`, `get_integer()` and so on that raise an `CannotMakeArguments` exception if any arguments are missing or incorrect. This cleanly and simply signals to Cline that the given arguments aren't appropriate to this task, which reduces the amount of validation that _you_ have to do.

Essentially, `make_args()` either returns strongly-typed arguments or raises `CannotMakeArguments`.

By the time Cline hits your task's `invoke()` function, your code needs only to operate on those strongly-typed arguments. In this example, `SumTask` simply sums the two arguments, writes the response, then returns the shell exit code `0`.

`SubtractTask` is almost identical, expect this task asserts that the `sub` flag is truthy and _subtracts_ the numbers rather than summing them:

```python
class SubtractTask(Task[IntegerArgs]):
    @classmethod
    def make_args(
        cls,
        args: CommandLineArguments,
    ) -> IntegerArgs:
        args.assert_true("sub")
        return IntegerArgs(
            a=args.get_integer("a"),
            b=args.get_integer("b"),
        )

    def invoke(self) -> int:
        result = self.args.a - self.args.b
        self.out.write(f"{result}\n")
        return 0
```

Finally, we need to create a `__main__.py` script that invokes our CLI:

```python
from example.cli import Cli


def entry() -> None:
    Cli.invoke_and_exit()


if __name__ == "__main__":
    entry()
```

...and that's it! On startup, Cline will walk through your registered tasks until one returns strongly-typed arguments for the given command line arguments, then executes it.

And if none of your registered tasks can handle the arguments, Cline falls back to printing your application's usage information.

## 1.0.0

Cline can be installed via pip:

```bash
pip install cline
```

The code is released under the MIT licence at [github.com/cariad/cline](https://github.com/cariad/cline), and the package is documented at [cariad.github.io/cline](https://cariad.github.io/cline).

Have fun!
