---
date: 2021-10-06
title: ansiscape 1.0.0
---

In an upcoming project I'll need to interpret ANSI escape codes embedded in strings.

I ended up writing a Python package -- `ansiscape` -- to take care of it, and I want to talk about it!

<!--more-->

## Interpreting escape codes

`ansiscape`'s _raison d'être_ is interpretation of ANSI escape codes. I wanted to input, say, `"\033[1mHello, world!\033[22m"` and receive an understanding that this describes "Hello, world!" in bold.

The code for performing the interpretation looks like this:

```python
from ansiscape import Sequence

sequence = Sequence("\033[1mHello, world!\033[22m")

for part in sequence.resolved:
    print(part)
```

Each `part` is either a string or a strongly-typed dictionary[^interpretation] that describes the formatting of subsequent strings.

The `parts` for `"\033[1mHello, world!\033[22m"`, for example, are:

[^interpretation]: [ansiscape 1.0.0 Interpretation dictionary](https://ansiscape.readthedocs.io/en/1.0.0/interpretation/)

1. `{ "weight": Weight.HEAVY }`
1. `"Hello, world!"`
1. `{ "weight": Weight.NORMAL }`

`ansiscape` recognises and interprets:

- Alternative fonts
- Background and foreground colours; named, 8 bit and 24 bit
- Blinking
- Calligraphy
- Concealment
- Frames
- Ideograms
- Inversion
- Overlining
- Proportional spacing
- Strike-through
- Underlining
- Weight

## Embedding escape codes

I didn't need to go as far as supporting the creation strings with embedded codes, but it gave me the opportunity to tackle an interesting problem: **nesting**.

Let's say you want to format a string like this:

```python
green("Hello, ", yellow("world"), "!")
```

You'd expect "Hello" to be green, "world" to be yellow, and the final "!" to be green again, right?

Here's the tricky thing with that.

Say your `green()` function prefixes its input with `\033[32m` (green foreground) and suffixes with `\033[39m` (default foreground).

Likewise, say your `yellow()` function prefixes its input with `\033[33m` (yellow foreground) and suffixes with `\033[39m` (default foreground).

If that's the case, then running that code would generate the string:

```text
\033[32mHello, \033[33mworld\033[39m!\033[39m
```

Since the `yellow()` function suffixed `\033[39m`, the final exclamation point doesn't have any formatting. There is no ANSI escape code for reverting to the previous colour code; codes can only turn formatting on or off.

The way I fixed that in `ansiscape` was to have the helper functions suffix their inputs with a `MetaInterpretation.REVERT` value. Then, at the point of generating a string, `ansiscape` can take the hint to search back in time for the correct escape code to _actually_ set.

`ansiscape` has a massive library of formatting helper functions[^helpers] from `alternative_font_0()` to `yellow_background()` and they're all nestable.

[^helpers]: [ansiscape 1.0.0 helper functions](https://ansiscape.readthedocs.io/en/1.0.0/make/#formatting-helpers)

## 24 bit colours

As well as the standard ANSI named colours, `ansiscape` also supports 24 bit colours. `foreground()` and `background()` accept an RGBA tuple describing the red (float 0.0-1.0), green (float 0.0-1.0), blue (float 0.0-1.0) and alpha (integer 0-1) components of a colour.

For example, to make an orange string:

```python
from ansiscape import foreground

orange = foreground((1.0, 0.75, 0.0, 1), "Orange!")
print(orange)
```

`foreground()` and `background()` are, naturally, nestable with the other helper functions:

```python
from ansiscape import foreground, italic

orange = foreground(
  (1.0, 0.75, 0.0, 1),
  italic("Orange!"),
)
print(orange)
```

## 1.0.0

So, that's a thing I've been working on!

The code is available at [github.com/cariad/ansiscape](https://github.com/cariad/ansiscape) under the MIT licence and is fully documented at [ansiscape.readthedocs.io](https://ansiscape.readthedocs.io).

Have fun!
