---
date: 2021-10-10T15:00:00
title: dinject 1.0.4
slug: dinject-1.0.4
tags:
  - ansiscape
  - dinject
  - markdown
  - naughtty
  - python
  - thtml
---

Every development team I know loves documentation.

Justifying the time to keep on top of it can be tough, though.

There are always new features to sell. There are always more bugs to fix. Documentation falls by the wayside, and bites us all on the ass sooner or later.

One of the time sucks in documentation is keeping code samples up-to-date. As APIs and interfaces change, it's difficult to know when a forgotten piece of documentation includes a code sample that no longer works, or has a sample response that's no longer accurate.

I've just released `dinject` to help!

<!--more-->

## What?

`dinject` is a CLI application that executes code blocks in Markdown documents and injects their output.

Say, for example, you've written this documentation for a `hello` function:

````markdown
Call `hello` to greet the user. For example:

```python
from foo import hello

hello("Cariad")
```

Example response:

```text
Hello, Cariad!
```
````

Now, say `hello` has been updated to return "nuqneH" [^klingon] instead. Would you remember to go update that example?

[^klingon]: [omniglot.com, "Useful phrases in Klingon"](https://omniglot.com/language/phrases/klingon.php)

With `dinject`, rather than include the example response yourself, you set a placeholder tag:

````markdown
Call `hello` to greet the user. For example:

```python
from foo import hello

hello("Cariad")
```

Example response:

<!--dinject-->
````

`dinject` executes the code and injects the result:

````markdown
Call `hello` to greet the user. For example:

```python
from foo import hello

hello("Cariad")
```

Example response:

<!--dinject as=markdown host=shell range=start-->

```text
Cariad, nuqneH?
```

<!--dinject range=end-->
````

## CLI usage

Install `dinject` via `pip`:

```bash
pip install dinject
```

To run, just pass the paths to your Markdown files to `dinject`:

```bash
dinject README.md docs/cli.md docs/example.md
```

There aren't any command line configuration options, because all the configuration is specified by embedded attributes.

Personally, I run `dinject` in my test scripts[^personal] to ensure it executes before I commit and push any code changes.

[^personal]: [github.com, Ansiscape commit a8d44954b5c3bc2e52c3ce5e87bbe1ea21ca4fe3](https://github.com/cariad/ansiscape/commit/a8d44954b5c3bc2e52c3ce5e87bbe1ea21ca4fe3#diff-3722d9ba8feb2d3feac8ce71a209a638d4b404e1c53f937188761181594023e2)

## Attributes

The simplest tag is just `<!--dinject-->`, which will inject the output from the most recent supported code block:

```markdown
<!--dinject-->
```

By default, `dinject` will inject a plain Markdown text block. If you want to include colour and styles then -- courtesy of [Ansiscape](/tags/ansiscape/) and [thtml](/tags/thtml/) -- add the `as=html` attribute:

```markdown
<!--dinject as=html-->
```

If your code needs to run in a pseudo terminal to emit formatting then -- courtesy of [NaughTTY](/tags/naughtty/) -- add the `host=terminal` attribute:

```markdown
<!--dinject as=html host=terminal-->
```

A great example of fully-styled output is the CLI example for Ansiscape at [ansiscape.readthedocs.io/en/latest/cli/](https://ansiscape.readthedocs.io/en/latest/cli/)

## 1.0.4

The project is online at [github.com/cariad/dinject](https://github.com/cariad/dinject) under the MIT licence, and full documentation is available at [dinject.readthedocs.io](https://dinject.readthedocs.io).

Right now, `dinject` supports and executes only `python` and `bash` code blocks, but I'll add more if I hear from any interested sponsors[^sponsor].

[^sponsor]: [github.com, "Become a sponsor to Cariad Eccleston"](https://github.com/sponsors/cariad)

Until then, have fun!
